Hello and welcome to another tutorial in this material.
I'm going to continue our discussion on executable binaries.
We looked at the terminal, we said that it's a very important topic and then I recommended that if
you're using macOS or Linux, try to use the fish application, which is a shell that runs on top of
your current terminal.
It's a very nice interactive and it has a color highlighting and very nice features like other completion
and suggestions for which flags to use for known command line binaries.
Right.
So the executable binary, let's have a quick look at this because this topic is important for understanding
what happens when we go into the VM native image, right?
So first of all, in any operating system, handles your data through files, right?
So files or directories, remember, a directory is just say file that is has a an attribute that tells
the operating system to treat these differently.
Right.
So files are the actual binaries that are stored on your permanent storage right here.
Obviously, if something is in the in the RAM, which is a non permanent storage, we don't call it
file, we, we call it some data that is in the memory.
Right.
So when we say file it means some data that are on permanent storage.
And the way operating systems handle files is that they kind of organize it in the way that the operating
system understands.
That's why the concept of the file system for the operating system comes into play windows, the old
system's fat, 32 fat.
And then Windows switch to NTFS, which was the newer version.
Mac OS used to use the extended file system and now they switch to Apple file system or AP AFS.
Linux also uses its own file system, right?
So file system changes from operating system to operating system.
And that's how basically the operating system organizes the files or your data on the permanent storage,
right?
So every operating system organizes this data and knows how to access and reads the data or store right
to the hard disk in its own way.
And it changes from one operating system to another.
So if you are inside, when you open up terminal, as I mentioned before, you're inside some working
directory, right?
Usually the default working directory is the home directory of the user.
And I mentioned that previously that a computer can have or when you install operating system, you
can define multiple users for that computer.
Right?
And then operating system creates a home directory for every user.
So when some user logs in with their credentials, they are directed to their own home directory and
then they most likely don't have access to other users home directory unless some super user or the
administrator logs in with the administrative privileges and then enables access of one user to the
home directory of another user.
Right.
But by default, one user doesn't have access to other users.
Home directory and home inside the home.
Usually you have the desktops directory, application documents, downloads, etc., right?
Movies, pictures.
So and usually when you install an application as a user, that application usually takes advantage
only or only sees the user's home directory.
It doesn't see the entire computer.
Right.
And if you if you open up terminal and you want to list all the everything that is inside that directory
you use ls in mac OS and Linux in Windows you use die or d r which means the directory ls is the shorthand
for list.
And in hyphen l is a flag.
And I mentioned before that whenever you have a executable binary in the terminal, you type it.
It means it's the name of the application.
And using the path environment variable, the terminal and the operating system can search for that
binary.
In this case it's ls and then hyphen l is a command line argument that we pass to the LS application
and then a hyphen l means they create a long list.
Right?
So format the results in a long version.
If you want to see hidden files, you can say for example, hyphen A, which means all a small a show
hidden entries right here in the fish.
Fish shows you all the flags that are available for a command.
And what you see is that if I run LZ hyphen L inside home directory, the blue is all the stuff that
are here.
And right now they are all directories.
And you see the file permissions or file attributes and the format is, again, this is a format for
a unique space operating system like Mac OS and Linux.
And there are basically ten characters that and one extended character at the right side.
In this case, you see some of them have plus some of them have ADD, some of them don't have any.
So for now, let's focus on this default ten character from left to right.
The first character sets the attribute whether this is a directory or a file.
And again, file and directories are more or less the same thing.
And the only the main difference is that directories have the executable attribute.
What this means is that if you recall, we said when we talked about the terminal, we said that you
can change the behavior of a file from non executable to executable by using the mod command.
Right.
And then it just sets the attribute, this X attribute and you can probably guess that each three,
each group of three characters, you can probably guess what R, W and x are right R is read attribute
w is the right attribute and x is the executable attribute.
And again, because on a computer we have multiple users and some users together can form a group therefore
and therefore we have three types of categories for permissions.
One is the user or the owner.
If I create a file, if I log in with my user credentials and my operating system, let's say I go to
my home directory or desktop or somewhere else and then create a file.
I'm the owner of that file and that file exists on my user account, right?
It doesn't exist on some other user's desktop.
It only exists on my desktop and operating system, organizes and manages this behavior.
But then usually operating systems like Linux, Mac OS, they have from the root directory, they have
a shared directory, which means every user can put a file there and everybody can have permissions
to access, read those files, or maybe write them.
But by default, one user doesn't have access to to the home directory of another user.
Now if I create a file, I'm the owner.
So the first three characters, obviously the first character means it's not a directory.
If I create a text file, it's not a directory.
So instead of having D, I get a dash.
Dash means that attribute is not said or doesn't exist, right?
So basically when you have the means, the attribute that this file or this, uh, for example, applications
is a directory and that attribute is set if and then if it's a hyphen or a dash for the first character
means this is not a directory, it's a file.
Because the attribute for a director is not set.
And as I mentioned, files by default are executable, which means that you can this attribute directory
or file, right?
This first character determines what happens when you double click on a something that operating system
shows you, right?
If it's a directory means it is executable, which means if you double click, some application will
get executed in macros.
We know that if I double click, if I open a window or directory and then double click, what happens
is that the finder application opens up and shows me the inside that directory.
So it means when I double click on that, an application gets executed.
That's why directories always have this x permission, which means directories are executable.
Which executable means what happens in the graphical interface of your operating system?
What happens if you double click on that on that file right now?
If you remove if if there is a directory and then you remove this D permission, right?
And then it's no longer going to be a directory.
So let's head to, for example, eclipse here.
This is our previous example and I am going to first of all, let's open up terminal here in this root
directory of our project, right?
So let's see what happens.
This is our current working directory and if I say LS is just shows me that I have these kind of things
and this coloring applies to directories and by default my very nice fee shell.
It tells me that a directory is distinguished with a file.
If there is a forward slash here, which means this test tree is definitely a directory in the file.
Right?
If I say ls hyphen a it shows me also the hidden files.
So current directory the parent directory dot class path dot project dot settings which is a directory
as you can see.
So this coloring very nice distinguishes them.
The other way to distinguish a directory with a file is that this feature adds a forward slash to the
end of the the names that are directories, whereas these two dot class path and dot d store or dot
project, these don't end with forward slash, which means these are files, right.
And obviously we know that every directory in every operating system has two hidden directories.
One is the current directory and the other one is dot dot, which is the parent directory.
And then you can use the CD or change directory, command, dot, dot forward slash and then you go
to the parent directory, right.
And then I can go back to the directory itself.
Right.
But then the idea here is that for directories, if you're just changing the directory, you don't need,
for example, to type the forward slash.
I mean, it's recommended to always type the forward slash so that you explicitly distinguish between
a file and a directory.
But even if you don't type it, the terminal has no problem understanding that because of the file attributes
or for permission.
So if I say a CD, let's go up.
So instead of using the forward slash, I'm not going to use it.
It still works fine.
It goes to the parent directory.
Let's kill it up.
Say ls hyphen l line long list.
Now you see what happens here is that.
But as you can see, all these attributes and let's also combine the A hyphen L with hyphen L, hyphen
a, hyphen l or you can combine them hyphen a l.
So it shows me the current directory, parent directory, some files and then some directories, right?
And again, this forward slash is there.
So it shows me that.
But besides that, it also tells me that directories have the directory attribute to set, whereas the
files don't have this character set to it's hyphen.
Hyphen means this attribute is not set.
All right.
And you see every directory has a executable attribute set, whereas a file a by default it doesn't
have it's a executable attribute set.
So a directory is executable in the sense that basically if I open up a finder window, which is the
way the operating system provides file management to the user, this is a directory.
It means it's a file that is executable.
So if I double click on it, something happens, some application gets executed, and that application
is the actual finder itself on Windows, it's file explorer, for example, right?
Because then it gets executed and it loads the contents of that directory.
That's why when you see when you look at the file attributes of a directory, you see that it's directory,
but it's always executable, which could sound a little bit odd.
Why do why do directories have an executable attribute?
That's because when you double click on them, some application gets executed, which is actually the
finder or whatever file explorer that the operating system provides.
Right.
That's why directories are executable.
Now, if I if I show my hidden files in Mac OS, right, so if I go to, uh, here and then uh, so
let's see.
So we go into the job and this is our project.
That's what we're looking at in Eclipse.
There is a file here, right?
If I double click on this, nothing that happens because this extension dot project is not unknown to
the operating system.
That's why these don't have an executable attribute.
And we said that you can actually a script, write a script, shell scripts and they usually end with
that set.
So let's let's say a touch, let's create a file in this Java native image directory called run media
search.
So touch means just create a file.
So you see run media SSH is created and then we're going to put some text here.
So the way you can do it in terminal, you can for example run VM or I'm just going to say concatenate
with the cat command ls hyphen le and then I'm going to redirect this to run media search.
Let's allow these.
Uh, so, uh, let's.
Let's look at the contents of these in the editor.
Nothing went there.
So I think what we need to do.
Uh, let's see.
Oh, so what we need to do, we actually need to, I guess, equate so echo this text say ls hyphen
l a but then instead of redirecting to the terminal, we redirect the output of this echo command to
a file.
Right?
And then if I say less, run me that it is less is a command line application that shows the contents.
It says ls hyphen la and we hit Q We go, All right now if I do ls hyphen le.
It tells me that this ran me right now it's not a directory, right?
And then what happens if we change its mod change mod c mod plus directory run meta search it says invalid
file mod plus d, right?
So you cannot really convert the attribute of the directory to non directory.
I mean that's something that the operating system determines.
Right.
But for the rest of our attributes, read, write executable, you can change that.
So that's the first thing we want to do, right?
If I say from current way to run me that search, it says the file run meta search is not executable
by this user because if you look at the attributes, the first three characters after the first character,
it's our W and executable for the user.
I'm the owner of this file because I just created it in my user account.
So we're going to say see mod change the mod of this file to plus x at the plus x and then run me that
search.
And now if we clear and look at ls hyphen le, it tells me that again now the user has x attribute and
then everybody, even the group has x attribute, everybody else has x attributes.
So when you say mod plus x, everybody gets a attributes in terms of executing and the fish shell also
changes the color to red and puts an asterisk here, which means this is executable.
Basically, it means this is an executable file and you as you have the basically rights or the permissions
to execute it, this asterisk means you have the permission to execute it.
So if I say run me dot search, it's basically runs the command that is inside here ls hyphen la right.
And that's how this works.
So you can create shell commands, for example.
Here I can also after this I'm going to create another one seed and then saying that ls hyphen le and
then seed go to basically the name again.
So join ATP.
So we want to this shell command a script has four commands, so let's see what happens.
Now we change its content, but it's still executable so we can just run it.
So if you modify it, the attribute of the executable is still set.
So you can just say, run me.
And as you can see, this is the output of the first command ls hyphen le and then we are going to the
one level up and then running the second command.
The third command ls hyphen le but then we change the directory back again to the um to the void where
we started.
Right.
So you can change these commands and then every line gets executed, the output, the terminal shows
your output and then you can.
Yeah.
So in macros and Linux you can use the dot as such a script to write terminal scripts and then in order
to make them executable, you can basically use the command and change their set, their executable
permission.
For example, you can just type Java, hyphen, hyphen, virgin and I'm going to just run this again
and it tells me Java seven so it exactly runs this command write Java and you see you will see that
later on when we get actually to the compiling our Java application using a native image we can we will
write a shell commands shell script to automate the process and makes it much easier.
And when you write the shell script, you can make it executable.